Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

1. Database Systems Models, Languages, Design and Application Programming, RamezElmasri and 
Shamkant B. Navathe, 7th Edition, 2017, Pearson. 

2. Database Management Systems, Raghu Ramakrishnan, JohannesGehrke, Indian Edition, Mc Graw 
Hill Education. 

REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Database Systems: Models, Languages, Design and Application Programming, RamezElmasri and 

Shamkant B. Navathe, 6th Edition, 2017, Pearson. 
2. Database System Concepts, SilberschatzKorth and Sudharshan, 6thEdition,            McGraw Hill, 

2013. 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 

1. https://www.udemy.com/course/introduction-to-basic-database-concepts/, Introduction to 
Basic Database Concepts (Udemy).  

2. https://www.udemy.com/course/database-management-systems-mysql/, Database Management 
Systems – MySQL (Udemy). 

3. https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_cs46/preview, Database Management System (Swayam). 
 
 
 

 

MACHINE LEARNING FOR CYBER SECURITY 

Course Code:  CB2003-1 Course Type: IPCC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P):  3:0:2 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 40+0+26 CIE + SEE Marks: 50+50 

 

Teaching Department: Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) 
Course Objectives: 

1. Understand the need and basics of machine learning and learn the Decision Tree model. 
2. Learn ANN and Genetic Algorithm along with its applications. 
3. Explore the various learning algorithms using Supervised Learning. 
4. Understand the important aspects of Analytical Learning and difference between Analytical and 

Inductive Learning Algorithms. 
5. Explore the difference between Analytical and Inductive Learning Algorithms and analyse the 

techniques related to reinforcement learning. 
 

UNIT-I 
Introduction: Machine learning: what and why?- Types of machine learning,  Supervised learning and  
Unsupervised learning. 
Decision tree: Representation, Appropriate problems for decision tree learning and basic decision tree learning 
algorithm.  
Artificial Neural Networks: Introduction, Neural Network Representations, Appropriate problems for neural 
network learning, Perceptrons and basics of back propagation algorithm. 

  15 Hours 
 

UNIT-II 
Bayesian Learning: Bayes theorem, Bayes theorem and concept Learning, Minimum Description Length, Bayes 
Optimal Classifier, Naive Bayes Classifier.  
Instance Based Learning: k-nearest neighbour learning and Locally Weighted Regression.  
Analytical Learning: Inductive and Analytical learning problems, PROLOG-EBG.                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                15 Hours 
 

UNIT-III 
Combining Inductive and Analytical Learning: Motivation, Inductive –Analytical Approaches to Learning and 
Using Prior Knowledge to Initialize the Hypothesis. 
Reinforcement Learning:                                                 
Introduction, Learning Task, Q Learning.  

10 Hours 
 

 Page | 136  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

Suggested List of Experiments 
 PART-A 

1. Implement and demonstrate the FIND-S algorithm for finding the most specific hypothesis based on 
a given set of training data samples. Read the training data from a .CSV file. 

2. For a given set of training data examples stored in a .CSV file, implement and demonstrate the 
Candidate-Elimination algorithm to output a description of the set of all hypotheses consistent with 
the training examples. 

3. Develop a program to demonstrate the working of the decision tree based ID3 algorithm. Use an 
appropriate data set for building the decision tree and apply this knowledge to classify a new sample. 

4. Build an Artificial Neural Network by implementing the Backpropagation algorithm and test the same 
using appropriate data sets. 

5. Develop a program to implement the naïve Bayesian classifier for a sample training data set stored 
as a .CSV file. Compute the accuracy of the classifier, considering few test data sets. 

6. Apply EM algorithm to cluster a set of data stored in a .CSV file. Use the same data set for clustering 
using k-Means algorithm. Compare the results of these two algorithms and comment on the quality 
of clustering. You can add Java/Python ML library classes/API in the program. 

7. Implement and demonstrate the working of k-Nearest Neighbour algorithm and apply it to classify 
the iris data set. 

8. Implement the non-parametric Locally Weighted Regression algorithm in order to fit data points. 
Select appropriate data set for your experiment and draw graphs. 

9. Build a model to classify email as spam or ham. First, download examples of spam and ham from 
Apache SpamAssassin’s public datasets and then train a model to classify email. 

 PART-B 
Mini Project on Machine Learning: 
The main goal is to prepare students to apply machine learning algorithms to real-world tasks, or to leave 
students well-qualified to start machine learning or AI research. The mini project is intended to start in these 
directions. 
Students shall carry out either one of the following three kinds of projects: 
1. Application project. Pick an application that is of interest and explore how best to apply learning algorithms 
to solve it. 
2. Algorithmic project. Pick a problem or family of problems, and develop a new learning algorithm, or a novel 
variant of an existing algorithm, to solve it. 
3. Theoretical project. Prove some interesting/non-trivial properties of a new or an existing learning algorithm. 
(This is often quite difficult, and so very few, if any, projects will be purely theoretical.) 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 

1. Explain the fundamental concept and importance of machine learning, identify, analyze and 
categorize applications using decision tree algorithm. 

2. Demonstrate the application of ANN and Genetic algorithm for real world problems. 
3. Design and implement algorithms for supervised learning system. 
4. Design and implement algorithms for Analytical and Inductive Learning. 
5. Develop machine learning algorithm and reinforcement techniques for real world problems. 

 

  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 

Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 3 

CS2003-1.1 2 2 3          3 3  
CS2003-1.2 2 2 3          3 3  
CS2003-1.3 2 2 3          3 3  
CS2003-1.4 2 3           1 3  
CS2003-1.5 2 2 3          2 3  

1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 

1. Sumeet Dua, Xian Du, Data Mining and Machine Learning in Cybersecurity, CRC Press, 2011. 

 Page | 137  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

2. T. M. Mitchell, “Machine Learning”, McGraw Hill, 2017. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 

1. EthemAlpaydin, “Introduction to Machine Learning”, Second Edition, The MIT Press, 2004. 
2. C. M. Bishop, “Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning”, Springer, 2006. 
3. R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart and D. G. Stork Pattern Classification, Wiley Publications, 2001 
4. T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning, 2e, 2008. 
5. P. Flach, “Machine Learning: The art and science of algorithms that make sense of data”, Cambridge 

University Press, 2012. 
6 K. P. Murphy, “Machine Learning: A probabilistic perspective”, MIT Press, 2012. 

7. M. Mohri, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar, “Foundations of Machine Learning”, MIT Press, 2012. 
8. S. Russel and P. Norvig, “Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach”, Third Edition, Prentice Hall, 

2009. 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 

1. https://in.mathworks.com/ 
2. https://www.kdnuggets.com/ 

3. https://blog.cambridgespark. 
4. https://www.udemy.com/topic/ 
5. https://www.mooc-list.com/ 
6. https://peltarion.com 

 
 
 

CYBER FORENSICS  

Course Code:  CB3002-1 Course Type: IPCC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P):  3:0:2 Credits: 04 
Total Teaching Hours: 40+0+26 CIE + SEE Marks: 50+50 

 

Teaching Department: Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) 

Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the basics of Cyber Forensics. 
2. To understand and analyze forensic data. 
3. To analyze network logs. 
4. To study cyber laws. 
5. To apply cyber forensic skills to find out malicious users. 

 

UNIT-I 
INTRODUCTION: 15 Hours 
Digital forensic evidence collection and processing Framework, Fundamentals of end point forensics for 
Microsoft windows - Kernel and device driver architecture, Registry, Auditing and security architecture. File 
system handling - Reconstruction of files and directory structures on the FAT and NTFS.  

UNIT-II 
DIGITAL FORENSICS: 15 Hours 
Fundamentals of host forensics for Unix derivatives - Linux operating system, Kernel and device drives 
architecture, Security and audit mechanisms, File system and pseudo file systems, Reconstruction of file and 
directory structures using UFS and EXT2/3/4 file systems as exemplars.  
Forensic analysis of database systems, Database tampering, Forensic analysis of database components, 
Table storage, Transaction logs, indexes, Forensic recovery for table storage. 

UNIT-III 
NETWORK FORENSICS AND CYBER LAWS: 10 Hours 
Network device forensics, investigating logs, Network traffic and web attacks, Mobile device, Social media 
and wireless forensics, Steganography and image file forensics, Email investigation. 
Cyber laws in India, Case studies and tools. 

Suggested List of Experiments 
1. Collect Forensic data from Windows machine and create report. 

 Page | 138  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

E Boo ks / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1. https://www.coursera.org/specializations/full-stack-react 
2. https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/ 
3. https://react.dev/ 
4. https://react.dev/ 

 
 

FIREWALL AND UTM ARCHITECTURE 
Course Code:  CB2102-1 Course Type PCC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P): 3:0:0 Credits 03 
Total Teaching Hours 40+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 50+50 
Prerequisite CS1002-1 

 

Teaching Department: Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) 
Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the architecture of Firewalls. 
2. To understand the architecture of UTM (Unified threat management). 
3. To study how to plan Firewall deployments. 
4. To configure firewall rules. 
5. To understand and apply the security rules on UTM devices along with IPS and URL Filtering 

configurations. 
 

UNIT-I 
Introduction: 15 Hours 
Computer and Network Security Concepts and Principles History of Firewalls. 

UNIT-II 
UTM Foundations: 15 Hours 
Stateful and Stateless firewalls. Unified Threat Management (UTM) Foundations. 

UNIT-III 
UTM Concepts: 10 Hours 

The History of the Unified Threat Management (UTM) Concepts UTM vs other Security Architectures. UTM 
vs Next-Generation Firewalls, Best practices while deploying Firewalls in corporate environment. 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to: 
1. Understand the core components of Next Generation Firewall. 

2. Understand the difference between stateful and stateless firewalls. 

3. Deploy basic firewall along with IPS and URL Filtering feature. 

4. Demonstrate the capabilities of UTM over Basic Firewall. 

5. Able to perform basic Firewall troubleshooting. 
 

 
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 

Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 3 

CS2102-1.1 3 3           2 3  
CS2102-1.2  2 2          2 2  
CS2102-1.3 2 3           3 3  
CS2102-1.4 2 2 2          2 3  
CS2102-1.5 2 3           2 3  

1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 

1. Official Check Point Administration book (CCSA) - by Check Point Software Technologies. 
2. Learn Wireshark: Confidently navigate the Wireshark interface and solve real-world networking 

problems - by Lisa Bock. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 

1. Fortigate Firewall Security Pocket Guide (Fortigate Pocket Guide Book 1 ) – by Ofer shmueli 

 Page | 156  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

2. Fortigate Firewall Security Pocket Guide (Fortigate Pocket Guide Book 2) - by Ofer shmueli 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 

1. https://community.sophos.com/utm-firewall/f/recommended-reads/115519/sophos-utm-
architecture 

2. https://www.networkworld.com/article/2288390/a-closer-look-at-utm-hardware-
architecture.html 

 
 
 

ETHICAL HACKING AND NETWORK DEFENSE 

Course Code  CB1602-1 Course Type PCC 

Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P) 1:0:2 Credits 02 

Total Teaching Hours 15+0+26 CIE + SEE Marks 50+50 
 

Teaching Department: Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) 

Course Objectives: 
1. To understand the core concepts of Ethical Hacking. 
2. To understand how security vulnerabilities are exploited. 
3. To analyze the impact of security vulnerabilities in systems. 
4. To understand popular Network Defense solutions deployed at large organizations. 
5. To configure basic firewall and IDS solution. 

 

List of Experiments 
 15 Hours 

Fundamentals of Ethical hacking, how organizations gain from Ethical Hacking, Typical Life Cycle of Ethical 
Hacking, Types of Ethical Hacking- Red, Blue and Purple Teaming, Fundamentals of Vulnerability Analysis 
and Penetration Testing, Threat Modeling and Attack Surface Identification, Life Cycle of Penetration Testing, 
Using Kali Linux, and other tools for a penetration testing Assignment. Lab – Perform Vulnerability and 
Penetration testing on given Vulnerable system and generate report. 
Networking Primer-understanding Security aspect of OSI Model, Active and passive Network Attacks, Network 
Layer and Cryptography, Single Sign On (SSO), Email encryption: PGP, STARTTLS; IPSec, SSL3.0, TLS 
1.2, Attacks on SSL/TLS: Drown attack, Poodle attack, and Secure HTTP, DNSSEC. ARP Cache poisoning, 
MAC flooding, Port Stealing, DHCP attacks, DNS based attacks, VLAN hopping, Man in the middle attacks. 
Web Application Security: Security threats, XSS, CSRF, SQL Injection attacks, RFI, DoS/DDoS. 
Techniques for Network Intrusion Detection System: Snort, Signature-based and Anomaly-based detection; 
Firewalls: packet filters and stateful firewalls, application-aware firewalls, Proxies, NAT, VPN, Honeypots and 
Honeynets. 
Lab – Deploy Snort IDS and create custom signatures to capture malicious traffic. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 

1. To understand how to find security vulnerabilities in given system. 
2. To suggest the remediation steps for identified security bugs. 
3. To perform VAPT task on given system and submit professional report. 
4. To deploy IDS system. 
5. To develop custom IDS signatures. 

 

  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 

Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 3 

CS1602-1.1 3 2           1 1 2 
CS1602-1.2 3 2 2          1 1 2 
CS1602-1.3 3 2 2          1 2 3 
CS1602-1.4 3 2 3          1 2 3 
CS1602-1.5 3 2 3          1 2 3 

1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 

 Page | 157  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

 
TEXT BOOKS: 

1. The Web Application Hacker's Handbook: Discovering and Exploiting Security Flaws Book by 
Dafydd Stuttard and Marcus Pinto. 

2. Hacking: The Art of Exploitation Book by Jon Erickson. 
3. Hacking Exposed 7: Network Security Secrets and Solutions by Stuart McClure, Joel Scambray, 

George Kurtz. 
4. Snort Intrusion Detection and Prevention Toolkit by by Brian Caswell, Jay Beale, Andrew Baker. 

REFERENCE Books: 
1. Advanced Penetration Testing: Hacking the World's Most Secure Networks by Wil Allsopp 
2. Snort 2.1 Intrusion Detection, Second Edition by Brian Caswell, Jay Beale (2004), Publisher(s): 

Syngress 
E Resources 

1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/ethical-hacking-essentials-ehe 
2. https://www.udemy.com/topic/ethical-hacking/ 
3. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_cs13/preview 

 
 
 

SECURED MOBILE APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT 

Course Code:  CB3604-1 Course Type: PCC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P):  0:0:2 Credits: 01 
Total Teaching Hours: 0+0+26 CIE + SEE Marks: 50+50 

 

Teaching Department: Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) 

Course Objectives: 
1. Describe the architecture and overview of Android. 
2. Develop a mobile application on android platform using UI components and Android Components. 
3. Demonstrate data handling in Android and Develop a mobile application on Android platform 

using SQLite 
4. Build an Android web service. 
5. Develop application to demonstrate google map and navigation. 

 

List of Experiments 
PART-A 

1. Design four checkboxes namely any four food items and one button. Find total amount of food items 
selected in Toast message after clicking the button. 

2. Design simple calculator application that performs basic arithmetic operations. Use ADD, SUB, MUL, 
DIV buttons to perform operations, CLEAR button to reset the fields, and edit text widgets for reading 
operands, displaying result value. 

3. Create an application which generates a random color on each click. 
4. Implement the options menu concept in the application to choose between two activities (Give 

appropriate titles to activities). 
5. Implement context menu concept in application to change the background color. 
6. Design an application to send SMS using Intent class. 
7. Design a phone call application that takes a phone number from the user. 
8. Write an application to toast your joining date and course selected for engineering using a Date picker 

and List view/Spinner. 
9. Write an application to make a dialogue box to confirm the change of background color or image. 
10. Design an application that captures the image using a camera and set the captured image as the 

background for your application. 
PART-B 

1. Implement a service concept to play the music in the background for long duration and perform a 
foreground job. 

2. Implement an AsyncTask to count from 1 to 1000 in the background and the display the progress using 

 Page | 158  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

 2. Chris Bates,”Web Programming Building Internet Applications”, Third Edition, Wiley India, 2006 

E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1. https://www.cs.uct.ac.za/mit_notes/web_programming.html 

2. http://www.multitech.ac.ug/uploads/IntroductiontoWebProgramming.pdf 

3. https://www.w3schools.com/php/ 

4. https://www.w3schools.com/bootstrap/ 

5. https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBJECT ORIENTED MODELLING AND DESIGN 
Course Code:  CS3312-1 Course Type PEC 

Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P): 3:0:0 Credits 03 

Total Teaching Hours 40+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks 50+50 
 

Teaching Department: Computer Science & Engineering (Cyber Security) 

Course Objectives: 
1. Recall the object-oriented concepts, three pillars of object-orientation and their 

benefits. 
2. Illustrate the various models that can be used to demonstrate the objectoriented 

design of any real world software systems. 
3. Make use of use-cases for interpreting the requirements and develop class 

diagrams that model both the domain state model and design model of a 
software system. 

4. Examine the dynamic aspects of a software system, model the interactiondiagrams 
to justify those aspects. 

5. Relate how the UML constructs are used to represent various models. 
 

UNIT-I 

Introduction: 15 Hours 
What is Object Orientation? What is OO development? OO themes; Evidence for usefulness of OO 
development; OO modeling history.  

Modeling as Design Technique:  
Modeling; abstraction; The three models. Class Modeling: Object and class concepts; Link and associations 
concepts; Generalization and inheritance; A sample class model; Navigation of class models; Practical tips. 

Advanced Class Modeling:  

Advanced object and class concepts; Association ends; N-aryassociations; 
(Text Book-1: Chapter 1 to 4.3) 

Advanced Class Modeling:  
Aggregation; Abstract classes; Multiple inheritance; Metadata; Reification; Constraints; Derived data; 
Packages; Practical tips. 

State Modeling:  

 Page | 190  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

Events, States, Transitions and Conditions; State diagrams; State diagram behavior 
  

UNIT-II 

Advanced State Modeling: 15 Hours 

Advanced State Modeling: Nested state, diagrams; Nested states; Signal generalization; Concurrency; A sample 
state model; Relation of class and state models 

Interaction Modeling:  

Use case models; Sequence models; Activity models; Use case relationships; Procedural sequence 
models; Special constructs for activity models 
(Text Book-1: Chapter 4.4,5,6 ,7) 

Process Overview, System Conception:  

Development stages; Development life cycle, Devising a system concept; Elaborating a concept; Preparing a 
problem statement. 

Domain Analysis:  

Overview of analysis; Domain class model; Domain state model; Domain interaction model; Iterating the 
analysis. 

Application Analysis:  

Application Analysis:Application interaction model; Application class model; Application state 
model; Adding operations. 
(Text Book-1: Chapter 10,11,12, 13) 
  

UNIT-III 

System Design: 10 Hours 

Overview; Estimating performance; Making a reuse plan; Breaking a system in to sub- systems; 
Identifying concurrency; Allocation of sub-systems; Management of data storage; Handling global 
resources; Choosing a software control strategy; Handling boundary conditions; Setting the trade-off 
priorities; Common architectural styles; Architecture of the ATM system as the example. 

Class Design:  

Overview of class design; Bridging the gap; Realizing use cases; Designing algorithms; Re-cursing 
downwards, Re-factoring; Design optimization; Reification of behavior; Adjustment of inheritance; 
Organizing a class design; ATM example 
(Text Book-1: Chapter 14 and 15 ) 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 

1. Acquire Knowledge about different software systems modelling techniques,class design and 
associations by making use of concept diagrams. 

2. Illustrate Advanced Class, State and Interaction models of softwaresystemsutlilizingclass, state and 
interaction diagrams. 

3. Outline the system concepts, Development Life Cycle, AnalyseandDefineProblem Statement, 
Analysethe system domain, application, class, stateand interaction models. 

4. Overview of system design, estimate performance, divide it intosubsystems, managing resources, 
selecting appropriate architectural styles. 

5. Describe class design, Implementation modelling, Legacy systems andReverse engineering 
concepts, realizing use cases, associations, FineTuningClasses, Constructing Interaction and State 
models. 

 

  
Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 

Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 3 

 Page | 191  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

CS3312-1.1 2 3   1       1 2   
CS3312-1.2 2 2 3  1       1 2   
CS3312-1.3 2 3   1       1 2   
CS3312-1.4 2 2 3  1       1 1   
CS3312-1.5 1 3   1       1 1   

1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
 
TEXTBOOKS: 
1. Object-Oriented Modeling and Design with UML, Michael Blaha, JamesRumbaugh, 2nd Edition, 

Pearson Education, 2005 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications, Grady Booch et al, 3rdEdition, Pearson 

Education, 2007. 
2. Practical Object-Oriented Design with UML, Mark Priestley, 2nd Edition, TataMcGraw-Hill, 2003. 
3. Object-Oriented Design with UML and JAVA, K. Barclay, J. Savage, Elsevier,2008. 
4. The Unified Modeling Language User Guide,Booch, G., Rumbaugh, J., andJacobson I, 2nd Edition, 

Pearson, 2005. 
5. Object-Oriented Systems Analysis and Design Using UML, Simon Bennett,SteveMcRobb and Ray 

Farmer, 2nd Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2002. 
E Books / MOOCs/ NPTEL 
1. Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications, Grady Booch, RobertA. Maksimchuk, 

Michael W. Engel, Bobbi J. Young, Jim Conallen, Kelli A.Houston, Third Edition The Addison-
Wesley Object Technology Series, 2007. 

2. Object-Oriented Modeling and Design with UML, James R Rumbaugh, MichaelR. Blaha Pearson 
Education, 21-Nov-2011 

3. Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, Ramnath, Sarnath, Dathan, Brahma,ISBN 978-1-84996-522-4, 
Springer Publications, 2011. 

4. Object-Oriented Design, https://www.coursera.org/learn/object-oriented-designObject-Oriented 
Analysis and Design 
,https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106/105/106105153/# 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN PATTERNS 

Course Code:  CS3313-1 Course Type PEC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P): 3:0:0 Credits 03 

 Page | 192  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

 

LIFE SKILLS FOR ENGINEERS 
 

Course Code:  HU1008-1 Course Type: AEC 
Teaching Hours/Week (L: T: P):  1:0:0 Credits: 01 
Total Teaching Hours: 15+0+0 CIE + SEE Marks: 50+50 

 

Teaching Department: Respective Department 
Course Objectives: 
 

1. Understand Time Management, Managing Information Overload, Coping with Peer pressure and Stress Management 
2. Familiarize the Science behind Personal Health Management and Addictions. 
3.  Appreciate the importance of cultivating good hobbies, need for forming good habits and discarding bad habits and 

holding difficult conversations during crises 
4. Comprehend the importance of Creative Thinking, Continuous and Lifelong Learning, Collaboration and Team Work. 
5. Equip them to excel in real work environment proactively 

 

UNIT-I 
Introduction to Life Skills 3 Hours 
Meaning and Importance of Life Skills, Competitive Job market, Fast paced changes in Technology, Proliferation of 
Electronic Gadgets and harmful online content. 
Time Management 
Introduction to Time Management, Impulsive Behaviour vis-a-vis goal Directive Behaviour, Time log, Information Overload 
and coping with Information & Communication Technology (ICT) Revolution; Proliferation of Electronic Media; Exponential 
growth in online content; Impact of Information Overload on human brain 
Science behind Personal Health Management 3 Hours 
Ignorance in Society on health issues, World Health Organization (WHO) - Definition of Health, Human Evolution, 
Importance of physical work for human body & mind, Dangers of sedentary lifestyle, Germ diseases versus Lifestyle diseases, 
Integrating physical exercise into daily life 
Science behind Addictions 
Addiction - Meaning, Neurology and Hormonal basics of Addictive Behaviour, How addictions are formed; Harmful effects 
of addictions on Physical and Mental Health, Recognizing addictions in oneself, Coming out of addictions 

UNIT-II 
Need for cultivating good hobbies 3 Hours 
Need for Hobbies in maintaining Work-Life Balance; how hobbies help in maintaining good physical and mental health, 
Various Hobbies 
Habits 
Difference between hobbies & habits, Cultivating good habits & discarding bad habits: Role of habits for a successful life, 
How habits form; Analyzing one’s own habits; Recognizing useless & harmful habits, Cultivating & Sustaining useful habits 
Peer pressure and How to cope with it 3 Hours 
Human being as a Social Animal, Physical Pain & Social Pain; Awareness of Harmful Social Pressure, Role of Prefrontal 
Cortex in Judgement and Decision Making, why teenagers are vulnerable to peer pressure, strategies to overcome harmful 
peer pressure. 
Stress Management 
Stress, Types of Stress, Fight & Flight Response of Humans; Harmful effects of chronic stress; Symptoms of Poor Coping 
Skills of Stress, Stress & Psychiatric problems, Easy coping strategies for stress 

UNIT-III 
Continuous & Lifelong Learning 3 Hours 
Accelerated change in Technology Landscape, Shorter Life Cycles of Technologies, Need for Continuous Learning of other 
skills. 
Team Working Skills & Collaboration 
Team Work – Meaning, Skills and Relevance, Importance of Collaboration to succeed in one’s own career, How to be a good 
team member 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course student will be able to 
 

1. Apply the concept of Time Management, cope with Information Overload and withstand harmful peer pressure 
2. Comprehend the need to stay away from addictions by realizing the biological basis behind these concepts  
3. Develop good hobbies to maintain ideal work-life balance 
4. Develop the aptitude for finding creative solutions to problems and realize the importance of continuous and lifelong 

learning 

 Page | 238  



                                                                      Curriculum for B. Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Cyber 
Scecurity) 

5. Demonstrate positive  and progressive abilities 
 

Course Outcomes Mapping with Program Outcomes & PSO 
 

Program Outcomes→ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 PSO↓ 
↓ Course Outcomes 1 2 

HU1008-1.1 - - - - - - - - - 2 1 3 - - 
HU1008-1.2 - - - - - - - - - 3 2 3 - - 
HU1008-1.3 - - - - - - - - - 3 1 3 - - 
HU1008-1.4 - - - - - - - - 2 2 1 2 - - 
HU1008-1.5 - - - - - - - - 1 2 1 2 - - 

1: Low 2: Medium 3: High 
REFERENCES: 

1. Lieberman, D.E., “The Story of the Human Body”, Pantheon Books, 2013. 
2. Ratey, J.J., “Spark. Little Brown Spark”, 2013. 
3. De Bono, E., “Creative Thinking”, Penguin UK, 2016. 
4. Pachter, B., “The Power of Positive Confrontation”, Da Capo Lifelong Books, 1999. 
5. Duhigg, C., “The Power of Habit”, Random House Trade Paperbacks, 2012. 
6. Sharma, S., & Mishra, B., “Communication Skills for Engineers and Scientists”, PHI Learning, 2009. 
7. Tracy, B., “Time Management”, AMACOM, 2014. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Page | 239